Five Nights at Freddy's (FNaF) is a 2014 point-and-click survival horror game developed and published by Scott Cawthon. Set in a family pizzeria, the player takes on the role of Mike Schmidt, a night security guard. Schmidt must complete his shifts without being confronted by the homicidal animatronic characters that wander the restaurant at night. The player has access to security cameras to monitor the animatronics throughout the shift, and a set of steel doors that can lock out the characters. Using the cameras and doors consumes the player's limited electricity, and draining all of the power causes these tools to become inoperable.

Cawthon conceived the idea for Five Nights at Freddy's based on criticism of his previous game, Chipper & Sons Lumber Co. Reviewers complained of its unintentionally frightening characters that had animatronic-like movement, inspiring Cawthon to create an intentionally scarier experience. Developed in six months using the Clickteam Fusion 2.5 game engine, Five Nights at Freddy's was released for Windows through Desura on August 8, 2014, and through Steam on August 18. It was made available for Android, iOS, and Windows Phone later in 2014. Versions for Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, and Xbox One were released in 2019.

Five Nights at Freddy's received generally positive reviews from critics, many considering it a frightening and distinct horror game. Reviewers praised the atmosphere, sound design, and gameplay mechanics, although some found the jumpscares repetitive and the game to have little replay value. It became the subject of Let's Play videos on YouTube and gained a large fan following. The game's success led to the launch of a media franchise, including sequels and books, and its popularity led to several imitations and fangames. A film adaptation by Blumhouse Productions was released in 2023.

Gameplay
A gameplay screenshot showing the inside of the protagonist's office. Posters and memorabilia of the animatronics are plastered on the walls. A set of computer monitors and a fan sit atop the office's desk. To the right of the room is an open hallway, with an animatronic designed like an anthropomorphic yellow chicken peering inside the office.
A gameplay screenshot showing the interior of the player's office, with the animatronic Chica standing in the right hallway window
Five Nights at Freddy's is a point-and-click survival horror game.[1][2] The player controls Mike Schmidt, a night security guard for the family pizza restaurant Freddy Fazbear's Pizza. The player must complete their shift that lasts from midnight to 6:00 a.m. without being caught by the homicidal animatronic characters that wander the pizzeria at night.[1][3][4]

The player character, defenseless and confined to an office, is given access to a network of security cameras that provide views of various parts of the restaurant.[1][5] These camera feeds are used to track the movement of the animatronics throughout the night. Each of the four animatronic characters have distinct behaviors, and most of their movement takes place off-screen.[4][5] The player has a set of lights that they can use to illuminate the hallways to the left and right of the office, and if they detect an animatronic in one of the hallways, they can activate a set of steel doors to prevent the character from entering.[6][7] If an animatronic is not prevented from entering the office, it will catch and kill the player, causing a game over.[1][3]

Use of the cameras, doors, and lights consume the player's limited electrical power; if all the power is exhausted, the cameras become inoperable, the doors open and the lights go out.[8][9] The titular Freddy Fazbear character then appears playing the "Toreador Song", causing a game over unless the shift ends before he can attack.[4][10] The player must conserve power by using the doors, cameras, and lights sparingly, saving enough electricity to last until the end of the shift.[5][10] The game is divided into levels called "nights",[4] each lasting roughly ten minutes in real-time.[11] As the player completes each night, the animatronics become more hostile and the difficulty increases.[5][12] The main game has a total of six levels, comprising the five main nights and an extra sixth night.[4]

Plot
Five Nights at Freddy's begins with Mike Schmidt listening to a voicemail from his unnamed predecessor at the start of his first shift. Similar messages play on the following nights, in which the employee tells Schmidt about the restaurant and its history.[3] The security officer explains that the restaurant's four animatronic characters – Freddy Fazbear, Bonnie, Chica, and Foxy – are allowed to become mobile at night due to their servomotors locking up if they are left off for too long. He warns Schmidt that if an animatronic encounters a human after hours, it will mistake them for an animatronic endoskeleton and will stuff them into a spare mechanical suit, killing them in the process.[5]

The player is indirectly told about disturbing events in the restaurant's history. A voice message mentions "The Bite of '87", an incident which is implied to have led to the loss of a person's frontal lobe and forced animatronic mobility during the day to be prohibited. Newspaper clippings viewable through the camera feeds reveal that a man reportedly lured five children into a back room on site and killed them. Although the suspect was arrested, the children's bodies were never found. The restaurant later received complaints that the animatronics began to emit foul odors while blood and mucus leaked from their eyes and mouths.

On the fourth night, the voicemail implies that Schmidt's predecessor was killed by an animatronic while recording the message. The final message on the fifth night only consists of a garbling sound. Schmidt receives paychecks after the fifth and sixth nights. If the player reloads their game after completing the sixth night, they are given access to a seventh "custom night" where they can manipulate the AI Difficulty of the animatronics. Upon finishing the seventh night, Schmidt is fired.

Development and release
Scott Cawthon had developed several adventure games marketed towards Christians, all of which underperformed commercially. These failures caused Cawthon to suffer a crisis of faith. He lost interest in game development until he regained it following a spiritual experience. The experience left Cawthon less inclined towards making Christian games, and he began production of the secular Five Nights at Freddy's.[13]

After his construction and management game Chipper & Sons Lumber Co. received negative reviews, he decided to make his next game a horror-focused experience. Players commented that characters in the game were unintentionally unsettling and animatronic-like in appearance, reviewer Jim Sterling calling the game "terrifying".[8] Although initially discouraged by this poor reception, he was inspired to make something intentionally scarier.[8]

Cawthon developed the game alone over the course of six months, with his sons and friends serving as beta testers. He coded the game with the Clickteam Fusion 2.5 engine and used Autodesk 3ds Max to model the 3D graphics. The audio was produced with a combination of sound effects that Cawthon created himself and files that he purchased off the internet.[14] Five Nights at Freddy's was first released for Windows via the Desura distribution platform on August 8, 2014.[15] On August 18, it was also released via Steam.[16][17] A version for Android was launched on August 26, followed by ports to iOS on September 11, and Windows Phone on December 1.[18] Versions for Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, and Xbox One were released on November 29, 2019.[11][19][20]